--- 
title: "JTBD" 
date: 2021-06-15 
---
As a product manager for the PlayStation Codes product, I was eager to understand the needs of our internal teams and partners in the gaming industry. This led me to dive deep into the Jobs-to-be-Done (JTBD) framework to gain a better understanding of the motivations and goals of our various stakeholders.

The Jobs-to-be-Done framework focuses on the underlying goals that drive consumer behavior, rather than just the product features and benefits. This approach helps product managers to understand the deeper needs of their customers and identify opportunities to create value. I decided to apply this framework to the PlayStation Codes product.

To start the analysis, I defined the Jobs-to-be-Done for the PlayStation Codes product, identifying the key goals and motivations of our customers, as well as the internal teams and partners who rely on our product. Here's what I discovered:

Customers: The JTBD for our customers was to purchase game codes easily and quickly, without the need for physical game discs. They also wanted a simple way to redeem codes and access their purchased games.

Finance Team: The JTBD for our Finance team was to have accurate and timely reporting on the revenue generated by our PlayStation Codes product. They also needed to ensure that all financial transactions were secure and compliant.

Game Developers: The JTBD for our game developer partners was to have a reliable and efficient way to distribute game codes to customers. They also wanted access to data and analytics to help them optimize their marketing efforts.

To address the JTBD of our Finance team, I made sure they had access to accurate downstream data to reconcile the sales of codes. This allowed them to generate timely and detailed reports on the revenue generated by the PlayStation Codes product. By using this information, they were able to ensure that all financial transactions were secure and compliant.

For our game developer partners, I focused on helping them acquire game codes more quickly and reduce the fees they had to pay. This was achieved by streamlining ordering and code-generation process. Additionally, I provided them with access to data and analytics to help them optimize their marketing efforts and make informed decisions about how to promote their games more effectively.

The Jobs-to-be-Done framework allowed me to proactively identify the needs of our various stakeholders and find ways to improve our product. By applying this framework, I was able to create a more effective and valuable product for everyone involved.
